XIX Thou wilt, lover dearly, repeated as to Brynn,
As she and the minister sat watching little Pearl.
Dost thou not think her beautiful, and see with what natural skill she has made those simple
flowers adorn her? Had she gathered pearls and diamonds and rubies in the wood,
they could not have become her better. She is a splendid child, but I know whose brow she has.
Dost thou know, Esther, said Arthur Dimmesdale with an unquiet smile, that this, dear child,
tripping about always at thy side, hath caused me many an alarm? Methought, O Esther, what a
thought is that, and how terrible to dread it, that my own features were partly repeated in her
face, and so strikingly that the world might see them. But she is mostly thine.
No, no, not mostly, answered the mother with a tender smile. A little longer, and thou needest
not be afraid to trace whose child she is. But how strangely beautiful she looks with those wild
flowers in her hair. It is as if one of the fairies whom we left in dear old England had decked her
out to meet us. It was with a feeling which neither of them had ever before experienced,
that they sat and watched Pearl's slow advance. In her was visible the tie that united them.
She had been offered to the world these seven past years as the living hieroglyphic in which
was revealed the secret they so darkly sought to hide, all written in this symbol, all plainly
manifest. Had there been a prophet or magician skilled to read the character of flame, and Pearl
was the oneness of their being, be the foregone evil what it might, how could they doubt that
their earthly lives and future destinies were conjoined when they beheld at once the material
union and the spiritual idea in whom they met, and what did well immortally together, thoughts
like these and perhaps other thoughts which they did not acknowledge or define, threw an awe about
the child as she came onward. Let us see nothing strange, no passion or eagerness in thy way of
casting her, whispered Esther. Although it's a fitful and fantastic little elf sometimes,
especially she is generally intolerant of emotion when she does not fully comprehend the why and
wherefore, but the child hath strong affections. She loves me and will love thee. Thou canst not
think, said the minister, glancing aside at Hester Prynne. How my heart dreads this interview and
yearns for it, but in truth, as I already told thee, children are not readily won to be familiar
with me. They will not climb my knee, nor prattle in my ear, nor answer to my smile, but stand apart
and eye me strangely. Even little babes, when I take them in my arms, weep bitterly. Yet Pearl,
twice in her little lifetime, hath been kind to me. The first time thou knowest it well, the last
was when thou let'st her with thee to the house of yonder stern old governor, and thou didst
plead so bravely in her behalf and mine, answered the mother. I remember it, and so shall little Pearl
fear nothing. She may be strange and shy at first, but will soon learn to love thee.
By this time Pearl had reached the margin of the brook and stood on the further side, gazing silently
at Hester and the clergyman, who still sat together on the mossy tree trunk waiting to receive her.
Just where she had paused, the brook danced to form a pool, so smooth and quiet that it reflected
a perfect image of her little figure, with all the brilliant picturesqueness of her beauty.
In its adornment of flowers and wreathed foliage, but more refined in spiritual eyes than the
This image, so nearly identical with the living Pearl, seemed to communicate somewhat of its own
shadowy and intangible quality to the child herself. It was strange, the way in which Pearl stood,
looking so steadfastly at them through the dim medium of the forest gloom. Herself, meanwhile,
all glorified with a ray of sunshine that was attracted through the wood as by a certain
sympathy. In the brook beneath stood another child, another and the same, but likewise its ray of
golden light. Hester felt herself in some indistinct and tantalizing manner, estranged from Pearl,
as if the child in her lonely ramble through the forest had strayed out of the sphere in which she
and her mother dwelt together and was now vainly seeking to return to it. There was both truth and
in the impression the child and mother were estranged, but through Hester's fault, not Pearl's.
Since the latter rambled from her side, another inmate had been admitted within the circle of
the mother's feelings and so modified the aspect of them all that Pearl, the returning wanderer,
could not find her wanted place and hardly knew where she was.
I have a strange fancy, observed the sensitive minister, that this brook is the boundary between
two worlds and that thou canst never meet thy Pearl again. Or is she an elfish spirit who,
as the legends of our childhood taught us, is forbidden to cross a running stream? Pray hasten
her, for this delay has already imparted a tremor to my nerves. Come, dearest child,
said Hester encouragingly, and stretching out both her arms. How slow thou art! When hast thou been
so sluggish before now? Here is a friend of mine who must be thy friend also. Thou wilt have twice
as much love henceforward as thy mother alone could give thee. Leap across the brook and come to us.
Thou canst leap like a young deer. Pearl, without responding in any manner to these honey-sweet
expressions, remained on the other side of the brook. Now she fixed her bright, wild eyes on her
mother, now on the minister, and now included them both in the same glance, as if to detect and
explain to herself the relation which they bore to one another. For some unaccountable reason,
as Arthur Dimmesdale felt the child's eyes upon himself, his hand, with that gesture so habitual
as to have become involuntary, stole over his heart. At length, assuming a singular air of
authority, Pearl stretched out her hand with the small forefinger extended, and pointing evidently
towards her mother's breast. And beneath, in the mirror of the brook, there was a flower girdled
and sunny image of little Pearl pointing her small forefinger to. Thou strange child, why dost thou
not come to me? exclaimed Esther. Pearl still pointed with her forefinger, and a frown gathered
on her brow, the more impressive from the childish, the almost baby-like aspect of the features that
conveyed it. As her mother still kept beckoning to her and arraying face in a holiday suit of
unaccustomed smiles, the child stamped her foot with a yet more imperious look and gesture.
In the brook again was the fantastic beauty of the image, with its reflected frown,
its pointed finger, and imperious gesture, giving emphasis to the aspect of little Pearl.
Hasten, Pearl, or I shall be angry with thee, cried Esther Brin, who, however,
inured to such behavior on the elf child's part at other seasons, was naturally anxious for a
deportment now. Leap across the brook, naughty child, and run hither, else I must come to thee.
But Pearl, not a whit startled at her mother's threats any more than mollified by her entreaties,
now suddenly burst into a fit of passion, gesticulating violently and throwing her small
figure into the most extravagant contortions. She accompanied this wild outbreak with piercing
shrieks, which the woods reverberated on all sides, so that alone as she was in her childish
and unreasonable wrath, it seemed as if a hidden multitude were lending her their sympathy and
encouragement. Seen in the brook once more was the shadowy wrath of Pearl's image,
crowned and girdled with flowers, but stamping its foot, wildly gesticulating,
and in the midst of all still pointing its small forefinger at Esther's bosom.
I see what else the child whispered Esther into the clergyman, and turning pale in spite of a strong
effort to conceal her trouble and annoyance. Children will not abide any, the slightest
change in the accustomed aspect of things that are dearly before their eyes.
Pearl misses something that she has always seen me wear.
I pray you, answer the minister, if thou hast any means of pacifying the child.
Do it forthwith, save it were the cankered wrath of an old witch like Mistress Ibbons,
addity, attempting to smile. I know nothing that I would not sooner encounter than this passion
in a child. In Pearl's young beauty, as in the wrinkled witch, it has a preternatural effect.
Pacify her, if thou lovest me. Esther turned again towards Pearl with a crimson blush upon
her cheek, a conscious glance, a sigh, clergyman, and then a heavy sigh, while even before she had
time to speak the blush yielded to a deadly pallor. Pearl, said she sadly, looked down at thy feet
there before thee on the hither side of the brook. The child turned her eyes to the point indicated
in their lay, the scarlet letter, so close upon the margin of the stream that the gold embroidery
was reflected in it. Bring it hither, said Esther. Come thou and take it up, answered Pearl.
Was ever such a child, observed Esther's sigh to the minister. Oh, I have much to tell thee about
her. But in very truth, she is right as regards this hateful token. I must bear its torture yet
only a few days longer until we shall have left this region and looked back hither as to a land
which we have dreamed of. The forest cannot hide it. The mid-ocean shall take it from my hand and
swallow it up forever with these words. She advanced to the margin of the brook, took up the
scarlet letter, and fastened it again into her bosom. Hopefully but a moment ago, as Esther had
spoken of drowning it in the deep sea, there was a sense of inevitable doom upon her as she thus
received back this deadly symbol from the hand of fate. She had flung it into infinite space.
She had drawn an hour's free breath, and here again was the scarlet misery glittering on the old
spot. So it ever is, whether thus typified or no, that an evil deed invests itself with the character
of doom. Hester next gathered up the heavy tresses of her hair and confined them beneath her cap,
as if there were a withering spell in the sad letter. Her beauty, the warmth and richness of
her womanhood, departed like fading sunshine, and a gray shadow seemed to fall across her.
When the dreary change was wrought, she extended her hand to Pearl.
Does thou know thy mother now, child, as she reproachfully, but with a subdued tone?
Wilt thou come across the brook and own thy mother, now that she has her shame upon her,
now that she is sad? Yes, now I will, answered the child, bounding across the brook
and clasping Hester in her arms. Now thou art my mother indeed, and I am thy little Pearl,
in a mood of tenderness that was not usual with her. She drew down her mother's head and kissed
her brow and both her cheeks. But then, by a kind of necessity that always impelled this child to
alloy whatever comfort she might chance to give with a throb of anguish, Pearl put up her mouth
and kissed the scarlet letter too. That was not kind, said Hester. When thou hast shown me a
wonder, asked Pearl. He waits to welcome thee, replied her mother. Come thou and entreat his
blessing. He loves thee, my little Pearl, and loves thy mother too. Wilt thou not love him?
Come, he longs to greet thee. Doth he love us, said Pearl, looking up with acute intelligence
into her mother's face. Will he go back with us, hand in hand, we three together into the town?
Not now, my child, answered Hester. But in days to come he will walk hand in hand with us.
We will have a home and fireside of our own, and thou shalt sit upon his knee, and he will
teach thee many things, and love thee dearly. Thou wilt love him, wilt thou not? And will he
always keep his hand over his heart, inquired Pearl? Foolish child, what a question is that,
exclaimed our mother. Come, and ask his blessing. But whether influenced by the jealousy that seems
instinctive with every petted child towards a dangerous rival, or from whatever caprice of
her freakish nature, Pearl would show no favour to the clergyman. It was only by an exertion of
force that our mother brought her up to him, hanging back and manifesting her reluctance by
grimaces, of which, ever since her babyhood, she had possessed a singular variety, and could
transform her mobile physiognomy into a series of different aspects, with a new mischief in them
each and all. The minister, painfully embarrassed but hoping that a kiss might prove a talisman
to admit him into the child's kindly regards, bent forward and impressed one on her brow.
Hereupon, Pearl broke away from her mother, and running to the brook, stooped over it and
bathed her forehead, until the unwelcome kiss was quite washed off and diffused through a long lapse
of the gliding water. She then remained apart, silently watching Esther and the clergyman,
while they talked together and made such arrangements as were suggested by their new
position, and the purposes soon to be fulfilled, and now this fateful interview had come to a close.
The dell was to be left in solitude among its dark old trees, which with their multitudinous tongues
would whisper long of what had passed there, and no mortal be the wiser, and the melancholy brook
would add this other dell to the mystery with which its little heart was already overburdened,
and whereof it still kept up a murmuring babble, with not a whit more cheerfulness of tone than
age is heretofore.